---
title: "4. An excise tax in the apple market"
description: "This experiment presents a competitive market where students act either as suppliers or demanders of apples."
style: chapter
---

{% include metadata %}

# **Experiment 4** An excise tax in the apple market

{% if site.audience != "students" %}

## 4.1 Introduction 

> ### CORE projects
> 
> Concepts in the experiment are related to the material in:
> 
> - [Unit 8](https://tinyco.re/6328004){:.show-url} in *The Economy*
{:.info.web-wide}

An excise tax is a per-unit tax imposed on a particular good or service. What are the efficiency effects of taxation when used to raise revenue? How should tax revenue be returned? Who ultimately pays the tax? Does it matter who collects the tax?

This experiment presents a competitive market where students act either as suppliers or demanders of apples. The experiment consists of three scenarios that share the same distribution of suppliers and demanders:

1. an apple market with no government interference, representing a simple trading-pit experiment,
2. the same apple market with a per-unit tax paid by sellers, and
3. the same apple market with a per-unit tax paid by buyers rather than sellers.

The experiment can be used for three different purposes.

- Running Scenario 1 alone can provide students with the experience of a competitive market and show them how demand and supply meet in setting the equilibrium price and quantity. They can draw step demand and supply functions (see, for example, [Exercise 8.3](https://tinyco.re/5845630){:.show-url} in *The Economy*), compute surplus, and compare the theoretical predictions with the experimental outcomes. It also helps students understand the concept of market equilibrium.
- Running Scenarios 1 and 2 is likely to be the most common use of the experiment. In addition to the previous points, it gives students an insight into the functioning of a tax. They can experience the excess burden of the tax and discuss the use of the tax revenue. They can easily work on shifting the supply curve and can compute tax incidence and the deadweight loss. (See the [‘Discussion’ section](#47-discussion) for other possible applications.)
- Running all three scenarios adds to the analysis by allowing for discussion about whom to impose the tax on.

This experiment is based on ‘A Tax in the Apple Market’ from [*Experiments with Economic Principles*](https://tinyco.re/5417765){:.show-url} by Ted Bergstrom, Marcus Giamattei, Humberto Llavador, and John Miller. You can find additional material there.

> ### Key concepts
> 
> This experiment will help students understand the following key concepts:
> 
> - Supply and demand curves
> - Market equilibrium
> - Shifting supply and demand curves
> - Excise tax or per-unit tax
> - Tax burden
> - Tax incidence
> - Deadweight loss
{:.box}

## 4.2 Requirements
{:.instructors-only}

### Timing

The experiment is flexible and allows for different formats. You can conduct Scenario 1 (a simple trading-pit experiment) in 15 minutes. Conducting scenarios 1 and 2 (simple trading plus a sales tax) will take 40 minutes, including a brief discussion. All three scenarios, with discussion, can be easily run within a 50-minute class, especially if students have already participated in other experiments with a market. If you want to conduct all three scenarios and allow for a full discussion, or if this is the first experiment your students participate in, an 80-minute class may be more appropriate. You can speed it up by giving students access to the instructions beforehand. Running the experiment online will make the transaction process faster, but students will lose the experience of interacting with each other when trading, and it will take longer to converge to equilibrium.

{% if site.view != "instructors-preview" %}

### Resources

The experiment is self-contained and does not require any previous economic concepts. Instructors and students need a smartphone, tablet, or laptop that has a web browser and is connected to the Internet. The experiment can be conducted online or in-class. For in-class experiments, a projector is recommended to help with instructions, results, and discussion. The experiment will be run in [*classEx*](https://tinyco.re/7856446){:.show-url}.

### Number of participants

The experiment functions well with groups of very different sizes. In our experience, it works best with groups of between 25 and 50 students. A minimum of 12 students is needed to have at least one participant of each type. With small groups it is important to pay special attention to avoid collusion and ensure market competition. With very large groups trading may be slow, and it may be more difficult to converge to equilibrium in two rounds. As an alternative, you could split the class and run parallel sessions, telling students that each one represents an independent market.

{% endif %}

## 4.3 Description of the experiment
{:.instructors-only}

In this experiment, students act either as suppliers or as demanders of a single good, bushels of apples. Each supplier can sell and each demander can buy either 0 or 1 bushel of apples. A supplier’s Seller Cost (*SC*) for a bushel of apples is assigned automatically to each seller by the game and is visible in each seller’s personal information screen. A demander’s Buyer Value (*BV*) is similarly assigned. The distribution of Buyer Values and Seller Costs stays constant throughout the experiment.

{% if site.view != "instructors-preview" %}

> You can easily substitute the concept of ‘scenario’ for ‘experimental treatment’ if it works best for your class. In *Experiencing Economics*, we use the term scenario to be less technical and more flexible.
{:.sidenote}

The experiment consists of three scenarios. Each scenario has two rounds.

- Scenario 1 (no tax market) represents a competitive market with no tax. Students obtain the profits of their transaction. A seller with Seller Cost $$SC$$ who sells a bushel of apples for price $$P$$ will get profits of $$P−SC$$, and a buyer with Buyer Value $$BV$$ who buys a bushel of apples at price $$P$$ will get profits of $$BV−P$$. Those who do not trade obtain zero profits.
- In Scenario 2 (tax on sellers), sellers must pay a per-unit tax of €15 when they sell a bushel of apples. This tax is implemented by reducing the seller’s profits from $$P−SC$$ to $$P−SC−15$$. Suppliers still obtain zero profits if they do not sell.
- In Scenario 3 (tax on buyers), buyers must pay a per-unit tax of €15 when they buy a bushel of apples. This tax is implemented by reducing the buyer’s profits from $$BV−P$$ to $$BV−P−15$$. Demanders obtain zero profits if they do not buy.

You can choose between online and offline trading. In **online trading**, students send buying and selling offers through their devices, and transactions result from accepting standing offers. Online trading can be used in online sessions or in-class sessions. In **offline trading**, students negotiate verbally and transactions are formalized once students input and accept the agreed price on their devices. Offline trading can be used in online sessions (if there is a chat function) or in-class sessions. We recommend offline trading if your group is not too large and if students can easily move about the classroom to shop around or can easily negotiate in an online chat.

{% endif %}

## 4.4 Step-by-step guide
{:.instructors-only}

### Detailed instructions

Go to the [‘Quick summary’ section](#quick-summary) if you have previously run the experiment and just need a brief reminder of the instructions.

The experiment contains three scenarios, but it is flexible and can be cut short to attain different goals. If you want to show the functioning of a market equilibrium, use [Scenario 1 (a market without taxes)](#trading-in-scenario-1-baseline-a-market-without-taxes). If you want to study the effect of a sales tax and tax incidence, run Scenario 1 and [Scenario 2 (tax on sellers)](#trading-in-scenario-2-a-per-unit-tax-on-sellers). Finally, to show the neutrality of tax collection, add [Scenario 3 (tax on buyers)](#trading-in-scenario-3-a-per-unit-tax-on-buyers).

{% if site.view != "instructors-preview" %}

1. Enter *A Tax in the Apple Market* game in the *CORE* tab in classEx. Select ‘Play’.
2. Once all your students are logged into classEx, open the parameters window (Figure 4.1), input the number of players and select the trading mechanism you will use: ‘Trading Mechanism’ = ‘Offline’ or ‘Trading Mechanism’ = ‘Online’. You can also choose the currency and other parameters that are described in the [‘Parameters’ section](#parameters).

> In **online trading**, students send buying and selling offers on their devices, and transactions result from accepting standing offers. In **offline trading**, students negotiate and transactions are formalized once students input and accept the agreed price on their devices.
{:.instructor-tip}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-01.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.1"
   caption="Parameter values for a class of 52 students, using the euro as currency, and offline trading. See the [‘Parameters’ section](#parameters) for a detailed explanation."
   alt-text="Parameter values for a class of 52 students, using the euro as currency, and offline trading. See the ‘Parameters’ section for a detailed explanation."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

3. Make sure students understand the instructions. Tell them that if they want to find the best deal for their role, they will need to shop around. Ask if there are any questions, and then proceed to Scenario 1. Before sharing your screen with students, check the predictions provided in classEx to get an idea of the equilibrium price and quantity in each scenario you are planning to run. This will help you know when you cannot expect more transactions and whether the average price approximates the equilibrium price.
{:start="3"}

> Remind students that they cannot buy or sell more than one bushel of apples in this round. Also, emphasize that trading is not mandatory and that zero profits are better than losses.
{:.instructor-tip}

#### Trading in Scenario 1 (baseline): A market without taxes 

1. Remind students that there is no tax. Select the ‘Start’ button. On their devices, students will see one of the screens shown in Figure 4.2, depending on whether they are suppliers or demanders.

<div class="slides">

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-02-a.jpg, figure-04-02-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.2"
   caption="Student’s screen for an **offline trading** session. For offline trading, the demander’s screen does not include a ‘Buy’ button because price negotiation is verbal and it is sufficient for the seller to submit the agreed-upon offer."
   alt-text="Student’s screen for an **offline trading** session. For offline trading, the demander’s screen does not include a ‘Buy’ button because price negotiation is verbal and it is sufficient for the seller to submit the agreed-upon offer."
   class="summary image-rows-1-1"
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-02-a.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.2a"
   slide-caption="A supplier with Seller Cost of €18."
   alt-text="A supplier with Seller Cost of €18."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-02-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.2b"
   slide-caption="A demander with a Buyer Value of €30."
   alt-text="A demander with a Buyer Value of €30."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

</div>

2. Give students enough time to trade. After trading stops, end the round by selecting the ‘Feedback’ button. Students will receive feedback showing the results of this round (an example is shown in Figure 4.3).
{:start="2"} 

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-03.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.3"
   caption="Feedback in Scenario 1 (no tax market)."
   alt-text="Feedback in Scenario 1 (no tax market)."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

3. Show the average price and the evolution of prices from the tabs in classEx. Ask students to think about whether, in light of the information about trading prices, they could have found a better deal than they did. If the average price is much lower than the equilibrium price, you may want to point out those transactions where sellers sold too cheaply, and likewise if the average price is much higher you could point out where buyers bought at too high a price. This should speed up convergence to the equilibrium price.

   There probably will be some ‘mistakes’. Ask students to look at the list of transactions and see whether anyone lost money in trading. If they find such a transaction, point out that nobody needs to make a money-losing trade, since one can always get a zero profit by not trading. (Since classEx does not identify participants, you can discuss these transactions without embarrassing the person who made the loss.)
{:start="3"} 

4. Repeat steps 1–3 if you wish to run a second round. It may be sufficient to run just one round if the average price is not too far off the equilibrium price.

   Before starting the second round, tell students that they are still in the same session, that they are going back to the same market, and that everyone will play the same market role as they did in the first session, but that this time they will have some experience in the market, and therefore may have a better idea of what choices to make. If this is the first experiment your students participate in, emphasize that this is a second round of the first session and not a new session. Make it known that Buyer Values and Seller Costs in this second round remain the same as they were in the first round. Repeat this reminder at least one more time than you think is necessary. Most students hear you the first time. But you want to catch the ones who didn’t.
{:start="4"} 

#### Trading in Scenario 2: A per-unit tax on sellers

Scenario 2 introduces a €15 per-unit tax that suppliers must pay only if they sell. This information shows on the seller’s screen (Figure 4.4).

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-04.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.4"
   alt-text="Personal information of a supplier showing that a €15 tax must be paid if the bushel of apples is sold."
   caption="Personal information of a supplier showing that a €15 tax must be paid if the bushel of apples is sold."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

1. At the beginning of Scenario 2, remind students that there is a €15 per-unit tax that sellers must pay. Ask them to look carefully at their personal information, as their role may have changed.

   Briefly discuss the way that profits are calculated, perhaps using a numerical example. Emphasize that a supplier who chooses not to sell any apples does not have to pay the tax.

   Despite all your reminders, it is common for some sellers to forget the tax and lose money (especially in the first round). Highlighting these transactions at the end of the round helps avoid similar mistakes in the second round.

2. Repeat step 1 if you wish to run a second round.

#### Trading in Scenario 3: A per-unit tax on buyers

This scenario is similar to Scenario 2 except that the €15 per-unit tax must be paid by demanders, only if they buy. This information shows in the demander’s screen (Figure 4.5).

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-05.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.5"
   alt-text="Feedback screen for a supplier who sold a bushel of apples and paid the €15 tax."
   caption="Feedback screen for a supplier who sold a bushel of apples and paid the €15 tax."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

1. At the beginning of Scenario 3, remind students that there is a €15 per-unit tax that buyers must pay. Briefly discuss the way that profits are calculated, perhaps using a numerical example. Emphasize that a demander who chooses not to buy any apples does not have to pay the tax.
2. Proceed as in Scenario 2.

<blockquote class="expandable-box wide" markdown="1">

### **Find out more** Advanced settings

This section is not necessary to run the experiment and the class discussion, it just provides further information on personalizing the classEx settings and parameters. You can skip it and go directly to the [‘Student instructions’ section](#45-student-instructions) if you just want to follow the standard settings, as we used in this section.

#### Parameters

classEx allows you to personalize some of the settings for the experiment by changing the parameters. [Figure 4.1](#figure-4-1) presents the default values for a session with 52 students and offline trading. Notice that it is necessary to input the number of participants for a correct distribution of types, and that, in the ‘Trading Mechanism’ dropdown menu, you must choose ‘Online’ to have transactions online, or ‘Offline’ to have students negotiating verbally either in the classroom or in an online chat. The number of rounds per scenario is fixed at two. You can always skip rounds, but you cannot add additional ones.

#### Allocation of types

Let $$P$$ be the number of participants. Let $$N$$ and $$R$$ be the quotient and the remainder of the division $$P/12$$, so that $$P=12\times N+R$$. The tables in Figures 4.6 and 4.7 provide information on the distribution of Seller Costs and Buyer Values common to all scenarios, respectively. The table in Figure 4.8 shows the correspondence between the type displayed by classEx in the student’s screen and their role in each scenario.

{% include figure
   html="
<table>
  <col width='20%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th></th>
    <th colspan='5'>Seller cost</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td><strong>Remainder <em>R</em></strong></td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>13</td>
    <td>18</td>
    <td>23</td>
    <td>28</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>0</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+2</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+2</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+3</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>7</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+2</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>8</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+3</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>9</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>10</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+2</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>11</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+3</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>"
reference="Figure 4.6"
   caption="Distribution of Seller Costs."
   alt-text="Distribution of Seller Costs."
%}

{% include figure
   html="
<table>
  <col width='20%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
  <col width='16%'>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th></th>
    <th colspan='5'>Buyer value</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td><strong>Remainder <em>R</em></strong></td>
    <td>20</td>
    <td>25</td>
    <td>30</td>
    <td>35</td>
    <td>40</td>
    <td>45</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>0–2</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3–5</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6–8</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>9–11</td>
    <td><em>N</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
    <td><em>N+1</em></td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>"
reference="Figure 4.7"
   caption="Distribution of Buyer Values."
   alt-text="Distribution of Buyer Values."
%}

{% include figure
   markdown="| Type   | Role in Scenario 1            | Role in Scenario 2            | Role in Scenario 3            |
|--------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------| 
| **1**  | Supplier with Seller Cost €23 | Supplier with Seller Cost €18 | Demander with Buyer Value €35 |
| **2**  | Supplier with Seller Cost €18 | Demander with Buyer Value €35 | Supplier with Seller Cost €23 |
| **3**  | Demander with Buyer Value €35 | Supplier with Seller Cost €23 | Supplier with Seller Cost €18 |
| **4**  | Demander with Buyer Value €25 | Demander with Buyer Value €30 | Supplier with Seller Cost €13 |
| **5**  | Demander with Buyer Value €30 | Supplier with Seller Cost €13 | Demander with Buyer Value €25 |
| **6**  | Supplier with Seller Cost €13 | Demander with Buyer Value €25 | Demander with Buyer Value €30 |
| **7**  | Supplier with Seller Cost €28 | Demander with Buyer Value €45 | Demander with Buyer Value €40 |
| **8**  | Demander with Buyer Value €45 | Demander with Buyer Value €40 | Supplier with Seller Cost €28 |
| **9**  | Demander with Buyer Value €40 | Supplier with Seller Cost €28 | Demander with Buyer Value €45 |
| **10** | Demander with Buyer Value €20 | Supplier with Seller Cost €3  | Supplier with Seller Cost €8  |
| **11** | Supplier with Seller Cost €3  | Supplier with Seller Cost €8  | Demander with Buyer Value €20 |
| **12** | Supplier with Seller Cost €8  | Demander with Buyer Value €20 | Supplier with Seller Cost €3  |
| **13** | Supplier with Seller Cost €18 | Supplier with Seller Cost €18 | Supplier with Seller Cost €18 |"
   reference="Figure 4.8"
   caption="Distribution of types in classEx."
   alt-text="Distribution of types in classEx."
%}

For example, in a group of $$P=52$$ students, $$52 = 12\times 4 + 4$$, and hence $$N=4$$ and $$R=4$$. It follows from the table in Figure 4.6 that there are four suppliers with Seller Costs of €3, €8, €13, and €28; six suppliers with a Seller Cost of €18; and five suppliers with a Seller Cost of €23. From the table in Figure 4.7, we can see that there are four demanders with Buyer Values of €45, €40, €30, €25, and €20; and five demanders with a Buyer Value of €35.

#### Downloading the data from your experiment

The data from your experiment is recorded by classEx and can be downloaded as an Excel file from the ‘data’ menu in the instructor’s screen. The Excel file can be downloaded at any time during the game or once it has finished. It will show all recorded data at the time of the download. Data can also be accessed later by opening the game again, selecting the corresponding session from the ‘previous results’ menu, and choosing the ‘download as Excel file’ option from the ‘data’ menu.

Each run is identified with a unique runID. Figure 4.9 describes the most relevant variables included in the Excel file.

{% include figure
   html='<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Tab</th>
    <th>Variables</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>players</td>
    <td>Information about participants.<br>playerID: a unique player identification code assigned by the program<br>Logtime: time of first entry<br>externalID: participant personal identification code (only if this option has been selected by the instructor)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>decisions</td>
    <td>Information about profits obtained by participants.<br>Profits are identified by playerID and round. classEx numbers rounds consecutively without differentiating between scenarios:<br>no tax market scenario: rounds 1 and 2<br>tax on sellers scenario: rounds 3 and 4<br>tax on buyers scenario: rounds 5 and 6<br>Recall that profits do not include tax returns.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>globals</td>
    <td>Information about parameters, like currency, transaction mechanism, or maximum and minimum prices.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>matching</td>
    <td>Matching of playerIDs to groups</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>contracts</td>
    <td>List of transactions. For each transaction classEx collects:<br>round<br>seller’s and buyer’s playerID<br>quantity (always equal to 1 in this experiment, since only one unit can be bought or sold)<br>price<br>status (confirmed, open, withdrawn, or rejected); only <em>confirmed</em> transactions took place</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>payoffs</td>
    <td>Empty tab for this game since it cannot be played with real payouts.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>stagehistory</td>
    <td>Internal code for tracking the progress of players throughout the stages of the game</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>'
   reference="Figure 4.9"
   caption="A description of the variables in the exported data."
   alt-text="A description of the variables in the exported data."
%}

</blockquote>

### Quick summary

This section is intended for instructors who have already run the experiment in the past and just need a brief reminder of the instructions to get them going. It assumes that your students are already logged into classEx and ready to start the experiment.

1. Check that the parameters are set according to your preferences. See the [‘Parameters’ section](#parameters) for details. Input the number of participants.
2. Get all students to log into classEx before starting the experiment.
3. Make sure that everyone understands the trading procedures and payoffs.
4. Begin Scenario 1 (no tax market).
    1. Open trading in round 1. As transactions are submitted, the instructor’s screen projects price, Buyer Value, and Seller Cost to the whole classroom.
    2. If you are using ‘online transactions’, the instructor’s screen will also display open buying and selling offers.
    3. When trading stops, send feedback.
    4. Run a second round. (You may decide to skip it if the price is close to theoretical predictions.)
    5. Before starting round 2, remind students that they are still in session 1, that the distribution of demanders and suppliers remains the same, and that there is no tax.
    6. Proceed as with round 1.
    {:.list-nospace-web}
5. Begin Scenario 2 (tax on sellers).
    1. Remind students that this is Scenario 2 and that for each trade the seller must pay a tax of €15 in addition to their Seller Cost. Tell them that if they do not sell, they will not have to pay the tax.
    2. Proceed as in Scenario 1.
    {:.list-nospace-web}
6. Begin Scenario 3 (tax on buyers).
    1. Remind students that this is Scenario 3 and that for each trade the buyer must pay a tax of €15 in addition to the price. Tell them that if they do not buy, they will not have to pay the tax.
    2. Proceed as in Scenario 1.

{% endif %}

{% endif %}

## 4.5 Student instructions

{% if site.audience != "students" %}
These are also available in [the students’ version](https://www.core-econ.org/experiencing-economics/book/text/04.html#45-student-instructions).

A [PDF of the student instructions and homework questions](https://tinyco.re/2435465){:.show-url} is also available. 
{% endif %}

### Introduction

There is a hint of frost in the air and the leaves are changing colour. You regularly go to the Farmers’ Apple Market to buy and sell bushels of apples. One day, the local authority decides to collect a tax of €15 for each bushel of apples sold.

### Instructions (for all scenarios)

In this experiment, you will try to make profits by buying or selling (imaginary) bushels of apples. In each market scenario, you will be assigned a role, either as a supplier who can sell one bushel of apples or as a demander who can buy one bushel of apples (Figure A).

Your objective is to make as much profit as possible. Profit will be measured in ‘currency units’, that we will denote with a currency sign (€, £, or $; we will use € in these instructions).

<div class="slides fixed">

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-a-a.jpg, figure-04-a-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure A"
   caption="Screenshots of a supplier and a demander for online trading. Screens are the same for in-class trading, except that demanders do not have the ‘Buy’ button and are assigned an ID number (see Figure B)."
   alt-text="Screenshots of a supplier and a demander for online trading. Screens are the same for in-class trading, except that demanders do not have the ‘Buy’ button and are assigned an ID number (see Figure B)."
   class="summary image-rows-1-1"
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-a-a.jpg"
   reference="Figure A-a"
   alt-text="Supplier."
   title="Supplier."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-a-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure A-b"
   alt-text="Demander."
   title="Demander."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

</div>

If you are a supplier, you will be assigned a Seller Cost (the cost of growing a bushel of apples) and you can sell at most one bushel of apples per round. If you sell a bushel of apples for a price $$P$$, and your Seller Cost is $$SC$$, then your profit from the transaction is the difference, $$P−SC$$. If $$P < SC$$, you are better off not selling and taking zero profits rather than selling for a loss.
{:.bump-up}

If you are a demander, you will be assigned a Buyer Value (your willingness to pay for a bushel of apples). You can buy at most one bushel of apples per round. If your Buyer Value is $$BV$$, and you buy one bushel of apples for a price $$P$$, your profit from the transaction will be $$BV−P$$, that is, the difference between how much you value the bushel of apples and how much you paid for it. If you have to pay more than your Buyer Value, you are better off not buying any apples and taking zero profits rather than doing it for a loss.
{:.bump-up}

At the beginning of the experiment, your instructor will announce whether you are using online or offline trading.

#### Offline trading 

In offline trading, sellers and buyers must find each other and agree on a price. If they reach an agreement, the seller should type the price and the buyer’s ID into her screen and select the ‘Sell’ button. The buyer must accept the offer to finalize the contract (Figure B).

<div class="slides">

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-b-a.jpg, figure-04-b-b.jpg, figure-04-b-c.jpg"
   reference="Figure B"
   caption="*Offline trading*: Once a buyer and a seller have reached a verbal agreement, they can formalize the transaction on their devices."
   alt-text="Offline trading: Once a buyer and a seller have reached a verbal agreement, they can formalize the transaction on their devices."
   class="summary image-rows-1-1-1"
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-b-a.jpg"
   reference="Figure B-a"
   title= "Selling"
   alt-text="The seller types the agreed price $$P$$ and the buyer’s ID (5) on her screen and selects the ‘Sell’ button."
   slide-caption="The seller types the agreed price $$P$$ and the buyer’s ID (5) on her screen and selects the ‘Sell’ button."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-b-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure B-b"
   title="Buying"
   alt-text="The buyer must accept the offer to finalize the transaction. Before it is complete, both the seller and the buyer can cancel the transaction by withdrawing or rejecting the offer, respectively."
   slide-caption="The buyer must accept the offer to finalize the transaction. Before it is complete, both the seller and the buyer can cancel the transaction by withdrawing or rejecting the offer, respectively."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-b-c.jpg"
   reference="Figure B-c"
   title="The transaction"
   alt-text="Once the buyer has accepted the transaction, the bushel of apples moves from the seller to the buyer. They cannot do anything else until the next round, since at most one unit can be bought or sold in each round."
   slide-caption="Once the buyer has accepted the transaction, the bushel of apples moves from the seller to the buyer. They cannot do anything else until the next round, since at most one unit can be bought or sold in each round."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

</div>

The sales contract is then publicly displayed on the instructor’s screen (Figure C).

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-c.jpg"
   reference="Figure C"
   alt-text="Completed transactions appear in the instructor’s screen, showing the Buyer Values ($$BV$$), the Seller Costs ($$SC$$), and the prices ($$P$$)."
   caption="Completed transactions appear in the instructor’s screen, showing the Buyer Values ($$BV$$), the Seller Costs ($$SC$$), and the prices ($$P$$)."
   image-quality="2048"
   class="float-top-next"
%}

It is a good idea to think in advance about what you will do the first time you are in the market and negotiating with other students. There are many strategies you could use and there is not a single right answer. But remember to shop around and look at the prices that have already been posted on the instructor’s screen.

#### Online trading 

In the online market, sellers can send a selling price that demanders will see in the contracts section of their screens (Figure D). Similarly, buyers can send a buying price that suppliers will see in the contracts section of their screens. Whether you are a supplier or a demander, your offer (if you made one) and all standing offers you can accept are shown in the contracts section of your screen. You can withdraw your offer and make a new one only if it has not been accepted yet. You can accept an offer by selecting the ‘Accept’ button. Note that once you accept an offer or your offer gets accepted, all other offers are automatically rejected, as you can only trade one bushel of apples.

<div class="slides trim-top-margin trim-bottom-margin">

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-d-a.jpg, figure-04-d-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure D"
   caption="Example of a seller’s and a buyer’s screen for online trading."
   alt-text="Example of a seller’s and a buyer’s screen for online trading."
   class="summary image-rows-1-1"
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-d-a.jpg"
   reference="Figure D-a"
   title="Selling"
   slide-caption="A seller has sent a selling offer (marked as ‘OWN’) and has received one buying offer. She can withdraw the offer, as no buyer has accepted it yet."
   alt-text="A seller has sent a selling offer (marked as ‘OWN’) and has received one buying offer. She can withdraw the offer, as no buyer has accepted it yet."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-d-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure D-b"
   title="Buying"
   slide-caption="A buyer has received three selling offers and must decide whether to accept any of them or none. He has not made his buying offer yet."
   alt-text="A buyer has received three selling offers and must decide whether to accept any of them or none. He has not made his buying offer yet."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

</div>

When a buyer accepts a selling offer or a seller accepts a buying offer, the transaction takes place and is displayed on the instructor’s screen. Since only one unit can be traded in each round, the buyer and the seller cannot make more transactions until the next round. The instructor’s screen also displays the standing buying and selling offers (Figure E). Look at it frequently for a general picture of standing offers and to get an idea of the price at which apples are being traded.

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-e.jpg"
   reference="Figure E"
   caption="Instructor’s screen showing one completed transaction and standing buying and selling offers."
   alt-text="Instructor’s screen showing one completed transaction and standing buying and selling offers."
   image-quality="2048"
   class="float-top"
%}

### Instructions for Scenario 2 (sellers pay a €15 tax)

In Scenario 2, sellers have to pay an excise tax of €15 if they make a sale. (An excise tax is a per-unit tax imposed on a particular good or service.) If you are a supplier with Seller Cost $$SC$$ and you sell a bushel of apples for price $$P$$, then your profit from the transaction is $$P−SC−15$$. Remember, you only have to pay the tax if you sell your apples. If your cost of selling the bushel of apples (including taxes) is higher than the price you are offered, you are better off not selling and taking zero profits rather than selling for a loss.

A demander with Buyer Value $$BV$$ who buys at price $$P$$ makes a profit of $$BV−P$$, and a profit of 0 if he does not buy.

### Instructions for Scenario 3 (buyers pay a €15 tax)

In Scenario 3, buyers have to pay the excise tax of €15 if they buy a bushel of apples. If you are a demander with Buyer Value $$BV$$ and you buy a bushel of apples for price $$P$$, then your profit from the transaction is $$BV−P−15$$. Remember, you only have to pay the tax if you buy apples. If your cost of buying a bushel of apples (including taxes) is higher than your Buyer Value, you are better off not buying and taking zero profits rather than obtaining a loss.
{:.loosen-5.keep-together}

A supplier with Seller Cost $$SC$$ who sells at price $$P$$ makes a profit of $$P−SC$$, and a profit of 0 if she does not sell.

{% if site.audience != "students" %}

## 4.6 Predictions
{:.instructors-only}

### Predicted results

Under the tab ‘prediction’, classEx provides graphs with the supply and demand curves and the competitive equilibrium predictions specific to your session. Figure 4.10 shows a particular example for a group of 52 students.

{% if site.view != "instructors-preview" %}

<div class="slides">

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-10-a.jpg, figure-04-10-b.jpg, figure-04-10-c.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.10"
   caption="Predicted supply (blue line) and demand (orange line) curves of a market without taxes for a group of 52 students (Figure 4.10a). The green line represents the shifted supply with a €15 tax on sellers (Figure 4.10b) and the shifted demand with a €15 tax on buyers (Figure 4.10c)."
   alt-text="Predicted supply (blue line) and demand (orange line) curves of a market without taxes for a group of 52 students (Figure 4.10a). The green line represents the shifted supply with a €15 tax on sellers (Figure 4.10b) and the shifted demand with a €15 tax on buyers (Figure 4.10c)."
   class="summary image-rows-1-1-1"
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-10-a.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.10a"
   slide-caption="Scenario 1: a market without taxes."
   alt-text="Scenario 1: a market without taxes."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-10-b.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.10b"
   slide-caption="Scenario 2: a market with a €15 tax on sellers."
   alt-text="Scenario 2: a market with a €15 tax on sellers."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-10-c.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.10c"
   slide-caption="Scenario 3: a market with a €15 tax on buyers."
   alt-text="Scenario 3: a market with a €15 tax on buyers."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

</div>

In the absence of a tax (Scenario 1), the equilibrium price is €23 and the equilibrium quantity is 21 bushels of apples. The total amount of profits on transactions is €462 (€252 from consumer surplus and €210 from sellers’ profits). The median price tends to be close to the equilibrium price even in the first round when students are sufficiently encouraged to shop around. It is common to observe one or two more transactions than the competitive equilibrium predicts.

With a €15 excise tax on sellers (Scenario 2), the supply shifts upwards; the equilibrium price is €33 and the quantity sold is 13 bushels of apples. It is usually necessary to run two rounds. It is also common to have some deviation in the number of units sold and to find some sellers who sold at a loss because they forgot to add the tax to their costs.

With a €15 excise tax on buyers (Scenario 3), the demand shifts downwards; the equilibrium price is €18 and the quantity sold is 13 bushels of apples.

In the presence of a tax, total profits of buyers and sellers equal €206 and there is a tax revenue of €195. Hence, total profits plus taxes collected amounts to €401, yielding an excess burden of $$€462−€401=€61$$.

Observe that the difference between equilibrium prices in Scenarios 2 and 3 equals the tax: $$€33−€18=€15$$, reflecting that the distribution of the burden of the tax is independent of whether the tax is imposed on sellers or on buyers. In Scenario 2, sellers bear $$€15−(€33−€23)=€5$$, and hence buyers bear the remaining €10, while in Scenario 3, buyers bear $$€15−(€23−€18)=€10$$, and hence sellers bear the remaining €5.

At the end of the experiment, results are presented in two tabs on the instructor’s screen. The first tab (‘chart’) shows the timeline of transactions for the different rounds. The second tab (‘on average’) shows the quantity sold, average price, and other statistics. You may expect to obtain something similar to Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12, which show the results from the reference example in classEx: an experiment run in-class with 52 students at the University of Alicante in 2021.

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-11.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.11"
   caption="Timeline of transactions of an in-class session run at the University of Alicante on 8 October 2021 with 52 first-year students. For clarity of exposition, only second rounds for each scenario are shown."
   alt-text="Timeline of transactions of an in-class session run at the University of Alicante on 8 October 2021 with 52 first-year students. For clarity of exposition, only second rounds for each scenario are shown."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

{% include figure
   images="figure-04-12.jpg"
   reference="Figure 4.12"
   caption="Transactions statistics of an in-class session run at the University of Alicante on 8 October 2021 with 52 first-year students."
   alt-text="Transactions statistics of an in-class session run at the University of Alicante on 8 October 2021 with 52 first-year students."
   image-quality="2048"
%}

### What might go differently?

Prices tend to converge quickly to their equilibrium values, but it is common for the number of transactions to differ by two or three units from the prediction in the competitive equilibrium.

If you observe fewer transactions than expected, it is possible that some buyers and sellers who can make a gain did not find each other. (Observe in Figure 4.10 that demand and supply curves are very close together for the last units sold, showing small gains from trade.) In this case, we suggest that near the end of each round you make some effort to encourage students who haven’t traded to look once more for a trading partner. For instance, when trading appears to have stopped, you could check the average price in this round and ask if there is anyone else who wants to sell and anyone who wants to buy at this price. If there are buyers and sellers who answer in the affirmative, you can offer them a chance to trade.

It is also common for there to be one or two transactions more than expected. This is usually due to mistakes by students buying or selling at a loss. This is particularly common in the sessions with a tax, where some students tend to forget the tax when accepting a price. At the end of each round, ask students to identify transactions in which anyone has bought or sold at a loss, and tell them that these students would have been better off not selling or buying, and obtaining zero profits.

{% endif %}

## 4.7 Discussion
{:.instructors-only}

A good discussion during and after the experiment is important. We like to return the tax revenue to students at the end of the experiment, once we have run all sessions. Returning the tax is consistent with the analysis of the excess burden or deadweight loss of a tax. (classEx does not return the tax, but you can easily calculate the per-capita tax return $$=Q*15/N$$, where $$Q$$ and $$N$$ are the number of transactions and the number of participants, respectively.) But before you return the tax, there are several issues that you should discuss with students.

Comments in the [‘Predictions’](#46-predictions) and [‘What might go differently’](#what-might-go-differently) sections, and in *The Economy* ([Section 8.7](https://tinyco.re/3836426)) provide useful further information.

Ask your students the following questions to frame the discussion.

{% if site.view != "instructors-preview" %}

### Excise taxes

These questions aim to draw on students’ economic intuition and to raise awareness of their behaviour, leading to a lively discussion.

- Is the tax too high or too low?

Students tend to perceive that the excise tax is too high. After all, it is €15 or around 47% of the predicted average price of €32. But then we challenge their perception with the following mental experiments: What if the tax revenue were used to provide a service to everyone (say free education) valued at €20 per person? Are taxes still high? What if the sales tax were a mere €1, but the collector kept all the revenue and provided nothing in return? If nobody asked where the tax revenue went, you may want to make students aware of two observations: first, that they were not troubled by paying a tax without receiving anything in return (neither a service nor a perceived reduction in inequality), and second, that taxes and the use of the revenue raised are intimately intertwined and that we cannot judge one without considering the other.
{:.instructor-tip}

- How should tax revenue be returned? 

This question usually turns to issues of fairness and justice. We tend to return the tax revenue on an equal, per-person basis, arguing that we used it to provide a public good to everybody (for example, the experience of the experiment and the lessons learned). Depending on how much time you have, you may want to ask for alternative proposals and open the floor for discussion about their advantages and disadvantages.
{:.instructor-tip}

- Who bears the burden of the tax? Who ultimately pays the tax? 

The experiment allows for an application where the actual share of the tax borne by each group can be easily calculated as the difference between prices in Scenario 2 and Scenario 1.
{:.instructor-tip}

- Does it matter who collects the tax?

(Only ask this question if you run all three scenarios.) We ask students whether they would expect a tax *paid* by sellers (Scenario 2) to be better or worse for sellers than a tax *paid* by buyers (Scenario 3). This tends to lead to a lively discussion in which students propose several hypotheses, and often don’t reach consensus. Comparing average prices in Scenarios 2 and 3, it is possible to test if net average prices (paid and received) are basically the same. That is, for example, whether the average price in Scenario 2 minus €15 is similar to the price in Scenario 3, representing the net price received by sellers.
{:.instructor-tip}

### Relating the experiment to real life

- Can you identify an example of a real-life situation that is similar to the situation in the game you just played?

[Section 4.9 Further reading](#49-further-reading) provides several examples of an excise tax, like a tax on sugar, alcohol, or tobacco. The VAT can be used to show the difference between a per-unit and an *ad valorem* tax.
{:.instructor-tip}

- How is this situation (the class experiment) different to the real-life situations we have just discussed?
- How is it decided who collects a tax? Compare a sales tax, like VAT, with a property transfer tax.

### Reflecting on the decisions that players made

- Did buyers take into account the tax when sellers were collecting it in Scenario 2?
- Why didn’t sellers increase the price by the amount of the tax?

### A hypothetical situation

You can use the following two hypothetical situations to discuss the role of elasticity in determining who bears the burden of the tax.

- Suppose that all demanders who bought a bushel of apples when there was no tax (Scenario 1) are forced to buy a bushel of apples when the tax is established, and that all those who did not buy when there was no tax are forbidden to buy in the presence of the tax. What would happen to the price of apples when the €15 sales tax is established? Who bears the burden of the tax?

This mental exercise makes the demand perfectly inelastic (a vertical curve at the market equilibrium quantity). The tax increases the price exactly €15 and buyers bear the whole burden of the tax.
{:.instructor-tip}

- Now, suppose that all suppliers who sold a bushel of apples when there was no tax (Scenario 1) are forced to sell a bushel of apples when the tax is established and that all those who did not sell when there was no tax are forbidden to sell in the presence of the tax. What would happen to the price of apples if we established a €15 tax on buyers? Who bears the burden of the tax?

This mental exercise makes the supply perfectly inelastic (a vertical curve at the market equilibrium quantity). The tax shifts the demand downwards and the price falls by €15. Sellers bear the whole burden of the tax.
{:.instructor-tip}

### Link to theory

-   How do the following theoretical predictions compare with the experimental outcomes?
-   Economic theory predicts that:
    - Establishing a tax in a perfectly competitive market with price-taking agents generates an irrecuperable deadweight loss, resulting from transactions that were not realized because the tax distorted the information embedded in the price (see [Figure 8.15](https://tinyco.re/3839981){:.show-url} in *The Economy*).
    - A tax that is collected from suppliers may be partially passed on to demanders, totally passed on to demanders, or not passed on at all. In general, the fraction of a tax that is passed on from suppliers to demanders in equilibrium depends on the elasticities (‘relative steepness’ of the supply and demand curves).
    - The competitive equilibrium after-tax price paid by buyers and the after-tax price paid to sellers are the same, whether the tax is collected from sellers or from buyers. It follows that the equilibrium quantity is not affected by who collects the tax. And, therefore, consumer surplus and buyer profits are also the same in both cases. These results allow policymakers to use other criteria, instead of tax incidence, when deciding on whom to impose a tax, like political feasibility or efficiency in collecting and monitoring.

### Critical evaluation of the experiment

- Which assumptions have been used in the experiment?
- How do these assumptions compare to real-life situations?
- Do you think the behaviour would change if the game was played for real money?
- Do you think the behaviour would change if the game was played with thousands or millions of people?

{% endif %}

{% endif %}

## 4.8 Homework questions

{% if site.audience != "students" %}

These are also available in [the students’ version](https://tinyco.re/0192746){:.show-url}.

These questions can be set for students to work on outside the classroom or can be completed and discussed in the classroom. They may help students reflect on their experience and understand their and others’ behaviour in the experiment.

For these questions, you have to provide your students with the following information: the distribution of Seller Costs and Buyer Values (from the tables in [Figure 4.6](#figure-4-6) and [Figure 4.7](#figure-4-7)); and transactions, prices, and profits in the *last round* of each scenario (from a screenshot of the instructor’s screen or from the data file downloadable from classEx).

Data from your experiment can be downloaded as an Excel file from the ‘data’ menu in the instructor’s screen in classEx. You can also use this data to create your own questions. A description of the data variables can be found in the [‘Downloading the data from your experiment’](#downloading-the-data-from-your-experiment) section.

{% endif %}

Your instructor shared with you the following information regarding the experiment: transactions, prices, and profits in the last round of each scenario, and the distribution of Buyer Values and Seller Costs.

### A simple competitive market (Scenario 1)

[Exercise 8.3](https://tinyco.re/5845630){:.show-url} in *The Economy* shows how to draw supply and demand ‘curves’ when they are step functions.
{:.sidenote}

1.  Using the distribution of types, draw a graph showing both the demand and supply curves, and calculate the predictions of the theory for a competitive market.
2.  Find the theoretical predictions for price and quantity at the intersection of the demand and the supply curves. If competitive equilibrium theory predicts a range of possible equilibrium prices, use the midpoint of this range. Compute consumer surplus, producer profits, and total surplus (consumer + producer surplus).
3.  Use the data from your classroom experiment to calculate mean (average) price, the number of transactions, total profits of demanders, total profits of sellers, and total profits of all participants.
4.  Compare the experimental results in question 3 with the predictions made by the supply and demand theory in question 2.

### A per-unit excise tax on sellers (Scenario 2)

1. Use the data from your classroom experiment in Scenario 2 to calculate mean (average) price, the number of transactions, total profits of demanders, total profits of sellers, total taxes collected, and total profits of all participants plus taxes collected. (When computing total profits of buyers and sellers, do not include any tax revenue.)
2. What was the effect of the tax collected from sellers on the average price? Did total profits of buyers and sellers fall more or less than the amount of tax revenue collected? Why do you think this happened?
3. Copy the supply and demand graph for a market without taxes (that you drew for question 1 in Scenario 1). Add a dashed line to show the supply curve that applies when suppliers have to pay a tax of €15, as in Scenario 2. What effect did the tax have on the supply curve?
4. Determine the theoretical prediction of the competitive equilibrium prices and quantities with and without the tax.
5. Use the information in questions 1 and 2 to calculate total profits of buyers, total profits of sellers, and total taxes collected by the government. (Remember that here you are calculating the values predicted by competitive theory, not the actual outcomes observed in the experiment.)
6. Calculate the excess burden as the difference between total profits without taxes and total profits plus tax revenue with a tax on sales.
7. Compare the experimental results with the competitive predictions.
8. Compare the price paid by buyers without and with the tax. Compare the effective price received by sellers without and with the tax (that is, the price received minus €15). Who actually *paid* (bore the burden of) the tax?

### A per-unit excise tax on buyers (Scenario 3)

1.  Repeat the calculations in ‘A per-unit excise tax on sellers’ for the case when the tax is collected from buyers.
2.  Compare the distribution of the burden of the tax when sellers collected the tax and when the buyers collected the tax. Does it matter who collected the tax? If so, in what ways?

## 4.9 Further reading

{% if site.audience != "students" %}

Also available in [the students’ version](https://tinyco.re/2960785){:.show-url}.

{% endif %}

- Unit 8 in *The Economy* discusses many of the issues covered in this experiment. [Section 8.1](https://tinyco.re/0286376){:.show-url} and [8.2](https://tinyco.re/7495730){:.show-url} describe the market without taxes, while the effect of taxes is presented in [Section 8.7](https://tinyco.re/3836426){:.show-url}.
- ‘[Governments look to heavier taxes in battle of the bulge](https://tinyco.re/9408978)’ (*Financial Times*, 22 February 2017) examines the potential effects of a sugar tax on health and consumption decisions, and on prices in other markets.
- ‘[Tax Me Please](https://tinyco.re/0485628)’ (*Planet Money*, NPR, 15 January 2010) looks at Denmark’s high taxes and their connection to the provision of quality healthcare and education.
- ‘[“Sin” taxes—eg, on tobacco—are less efficient than they look](https://tinyco.re/6374829)’ (*The Economist*, 28 July 2018) evaluates the arguments for and against ‘sin taxes’.
- Reed, Michael R., Xiaojin Wang, Yuqing Zheng, and Chen Zhen. 2015. [‘Cigarette Tax Pass-Through by Product Characteristics: Evidence from Nielsen ScanTrack Data’](https://tinyurl.com/2p85njx6). AAEA & WAEA Joint Annual Meeting, July 26–28. Agricultural and Applied Economics Association. In this article, the authors examine who bears the economic burden of cigarette taxes.
- ‘[Assessing the incidence of value-added taxes](https://tinyco.re/4724721)’ (Vox-EU, 13 November 2017) investigates who benefited from a VAT cut on sit-down restaurant meals in France.